from hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel
minutes. Oh, weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number two 89. Recorded
live Thursday, October 13th, 2011. Support for
Hanselman is provided by Telerik
rad controls, the most comprehensive
suite of components for windows
forms and asp.net web applications.
online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode, Scott
talks with Phil price from
the visual studio team about
performance and perf Watson. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman, and
this is another episode of
Hanselminutes today. We're going to
talk about performance, specifically the
performance of visual studio. We've
got Phil price, senior software
development engineer, and test it
Microsoft. How's it going, Phil?
I'm pretty good. How are
you? Not too bad. So
I wanted to talk to
you because I got in
an argument recently with a
guy who was telling me
that his copy of visual
studio, and this is his
words goes to Cleveland on
a regular basis. And what
he says when he says,
goes to Cleveland, is it
kind of goes gray. You
get that kind of curtain
of patients that that happens
as smoky look. And, and
the argument that we had
was that I'm just not
seeing that. And then I
said, well, you should be
running this thing called perf
Watson. So talk to me
what perf Watson is and
why his machine goes to
Cleveland. And mine does not.
Okay. So puff Watson is
a telemetry system. We built,
which detects when visual shooter
goes to Cleveland, as it
were and sends us reports
on, you know, what's happening
at that point in time.
And cyber is a studio
that, you know, it became
unresponsive. So as low extension
and the onsite video studio
and we're does it monitors
the, a main message loop
of the UI thread. And
if it doesn't respond for
more than two seconds, it
then goes and captures a
state and sends it up
to us. And, you know,
and then those reports come
via the internet. And then
we aggregate all the data
on the backend and we
look at why people are
slow now, why he was
slow. It can be any
number of things, but the
report, you know, we say,
Hey, it goes to Cleveland,
Hey, it's become unresponsive. We
definitely know that the UI
threat is busy. So often
rashly constrained on things like
file IO. You know, we're
doing large operations on the
UIs red, maybe we're reading
through a bunch of files
or doing some kind of
scan of assemblies and that,
you know, we're not necessarily
doing that in the right
place we're doing now in
the same place by your
rendering. So unfortunately there's a
shooter hangs. Okay. So for,
for context, from, for some
of the engineers that maybe
haven't done UI work in
a while, maybe talk about
the UI thread as it
relates to the background thread,
and why, why would something
like visuals do to ever
be doing anything on the
UI for a threat? I
thought everything was recommended to
be decoupled from the UI
and the background thread. Right,
right, right. So, well, this
judo is, you know, uses
column, right? So main column,
the two modes says sta
and MTA, a multithreaded apartment
and single-threaded apartment. Now this,
she is a single threaded
apartment, which w what that
means is any comm services
created, you know, by default
visits, you do, as you
initialize, unfortunately, are owned by
the UI thread and any
call to them. Regardless if
you call them from a
background thread, actually get martialed
directly to the UI thread.
So, you know, a little
message goes in the, in
the message queue that says,
Hey, if you're running from
about, you know, if you're
saying, Hey, cool, this from
a background thread, it goes
into message two and then
says, okay, I want you
to run this piece of
code and it's going to
happen synchronously. And it goes
through the message, security UIs,
red cools, the concerts and
bubbles back. So, unfortunately it's
not as easy as moving
to a background thread, but
now why business, you guys
doing that? You know, it's
an old application and really
it's about, you know, scale
when we're using the same
Shalon technologies as we have
been for probably since, you
know, the first integrated version
of his shoes are like,
I don't know, 2003 concrete,
remember, and the co you
know, rewriting these services, that'd
be a free threaded, or,
you know, you know, you
know, MTA has a not
fortunately been on our priority
list, and we've kind of
got away with that for
a number of years, but
then as, as she has
grown and got more and
more and more stuff inside
it, people were following the
same patterns as they always
have done. And the, you
know, it's kind of like,
you know, we have this,
this bouts of the UIs
registry and, you know, we,
you know, we're kind of
putting on more and more
weight on this bow is
constraining us. And I was
starting to like strain the
belt and we're not quite
fitting in. So are you
saying that is, is it
that visual studio was written
wrong before? And you said
we got away with it,
or is it more that
the techniques that we learned
about calm and threading didn't
exist, you know, 10 years
ago, trying to understand how
much we got away with
versus how much is just
the newer techniques have come
up? Yeah. I would say
that, you know, I think
that threads, it existed as
long as, you know, windows
has existed probably. And it
was just really a case
case, a case of getting
away with it. We didn't
really need to. Right. You
know, if you look back
to say the early versions
of industry day, we weren't
doing quite so much, but
you know, features come in
that say, you know, one
that Springs to mind is,
Hey, I've got a bunch
of unit tests and I
want them to automatically update
as they add a new
unit test, right. That work
needs to happen somewhere. And
that's happening on the UI
thread. I see. And is
it also a matter of,
of scale? Cause even though
computers have gotten faster, some
people have said, well, parts
of visual studio have gotten
slower. Is that because, you
know, someone might have 50
solutions when five years ago
they had 10, Right? Yes,
definitely. I think, you know,
applications again are getting bigger
and also, yeah, I lost
my train of thought. That's
okay. I realized that these
are kind of challenging questions
because I know I appreciated
that you were going to
come out and talk about
this, that when someone comes
up with a tool like
perf Watson you're, you're acknowledging
that there are parts of
the application that have issues
with performance, and you don't
want to say something sucks
just because you fixed it.
This is actually a funny
thing we were talking about
on Twitter a while back
that I think Microsoft sometimes
can learn from Apple. Apple
often comes out and says
things, yeah, this is 500%
faster, but they say it
in such a way that
doesn't make you feel like,
wait a second. Was it
500% slower a minute ago?
You know? So w with,
with visual studio, you know,
you want to accentuate the
positive and, and realize that
we're putting the effort in
to figure out how these
things can be made faster.
So perf Watson, how do
you, you're running inside visual
studio, but official studio is
not responding. How do you
know, how do you know
you're not responding? Right, right.
Because we are off the
UI thread. So you're running
in process to dev and
dot ESE. Correct. Okay. And
you can't be the bottleneck
you're, you're, you're well-written I
guess perf Watson is not
something that could be, You
know, there is a certain
cost to capturing the information
as to why you were
slow. I'm not going to
deny that, you know, we,
we need to write what
we actually do is we,
we capture it, dump out
the point behind, right. But
we've, we've already delayed for
two seconds. So we do
increase the length of that
delay ever. So slightly only
if you're running per Watson.
So, you know, there is
an overhead to that, but
the actual part that monitors
in process is extremely light
weight. It uses detours on,
you know, the operating system
calls that, do the, the
message loop. And then it's
basically a tiny little Canary
threat, right? So we, we
say, Hey, we know we've
processed the message. And we'll,
we'll, we know we've entered
the processing, we're gonna process
some input or an RPC
call. And then we just
sit down on the background
thread, you know, with what's
it called an event handle.
And we're just saying, when
you're done processing, you just
set the event handle. And
we're like, okay, we're good.
We were under two seconds.
Then if it goes above
that range and we call
actually to an out of
process component, which is, I'm
a little puff Watson service
to ECC, and we use
a name pipe, and we
say to that, Hey, you
need to go and capture
a cool facts, visual shoe,
Joe right now. Oh, I
see. I see. So one
of the terms that you
used in there, we want
to make sure to explain
those to the listener. It
sounded like you said Canary
thread. Yes. And is that
a reference to a Canary
in a coal mine? If
that is a reference there
Canary in a coal mine.
Yes. And the people who
may not be familiar with
that, a bit of English,
English, colloquialism, the idea is
that people would carry canaries
into the coal mine, and
they would have these birds
in cages. And if the
bird died, that meant that
there were gases in the
air and that we should
run. And the Canary is
kind of a university recognized.
Now, as something that's telling
you that something's bad, something
bad is going to happen.
So you were saying that
you have a little thread
that's running and watching for
that little bit of gas,
that's means we're all going
to die. And then you
capture that information. But it
sounds like what you're doing
inside of visual studio is
extremely small. And anything that
would be large, like you
said, is out of process.
Yes. Yes. But you've got,
you do have to remember
that when perf walked from
service XC, the outer process
component does capture the dump
file. It's a mini dump.
It does have to pause
all the threads and then,
you know, pull all the
information out memory to represent
the cool sacks on all
of those threads. So there
is a cost to that,
But of course, I'm already
hung at this point. So
it doesn't really matter. Exactly.
It doesn't really matter. I
see. Now, how did the
number two seconds get picked?
Like if it's not responsive
for two seconds, we jump
in. It was, it was
what we considered to be
egregious, right? So the general
guidance actually for response, responsiveness,
this things like input, it
should be under a hundred
milliseconds, right. We, we want
to shoot the stuff like
50 millisecond response time. So
things like input. And then,
you know, the guidance kind
of gets, you know, there's
certain stages, like a busy
cursor can be for say,
you know, one to two
seconds. And then if your
spot, if you thought over
two seconds, people are starting
to get really annoyed and
you should really be putting
up some kind of UI
saying, Hey, I'm doing a
bunch of tasks. Like I
kind of progress by saying
I'm doing a, B and
C. So we try to
line it on two seconds
that, because we're a while
away, we weren't putting up
responsive UI. And this is
the point we filed. The
folks would get really annoyed.
It's definitely on the high
end. We definitely want to
shoot for better than that.
But we said, let's just
go and get all the
egregious cases and start that
then moving forward. We'll probably
move that limit down to
maybe one second then maybe
even in future, down to
like half a second. Wow.
Okay. And does that value
matter based on how fast
their machine is? Like, I
know that they want visual
studio to run decently well
on like Adam processors and
small net books, but two
seconds it's two seconds, no
matter how many processes you've
got, Correct. Yes. You know,
we can say that anything
above two seconds that high
in the UI is red
egregious and we want to
fix it. No, ma'am no.
I mean, what's your low
end computer. Like, what's a
reasonable computer. I get that
question a lot. Someone's got
like a dual core Adam
and maybe a gig of
Ram or two gigs of
Ram. What's a reasonable netbook
to run visual studio. You
know, That actually sounds about
right. About two gigs of
Ram Juco should be reasonable.
Should we should have a
reason to experience that. I'm
not sure what the exact
min specs are, but to
me, that sounds about right.
Okay. Okay. So then do
I have, does everyone have
perf Watson already do all
visual studio, 2010 people have
that? Or do I have
to go and install it
first? Oh, you have to
go install it. It's available
on the business sheet gallery.
So inside there's a sheet.
If you got a tool's
extension manager and you can
search a Perth Watson on
the online portion of that,
and there's a little extension
there, you can hit install
and it goes and installs
it onto your machine. And
now for the developer preview
release that we released a
build fool installs had it
on by default. So build,
Do you think there'll be
in the box? Like at
the end it seems like
the kind of thing I
would want in the box.
I don't think we'd have
it at the end, because
as I talked about, there
is a certain cost to
capturing that information in the
answer process part, I think,
you know, for developer preview
or maybe a beta that's.
Okay. Cause we want to
get that information, but for
a, for a full release,
we don't want to induce
that cost on to everybody
then if they don't want
to pay it, No, I,
we want everyone to install
perf Watson, but like you
just said, there's a cost
without freaking people out. Are
we looking at like small
single digit percentages? I mean,
can you guarantee that in
the course of events, just
like regularly doing my job,
it's not going to slow
me down. And it's really
only when the, when the
dump happens, It's definitely 100%.
It's only when, when, when,
when you're hung them, we'll
go and capture that information.
That's that's, that's how it
works. The cost of collecting
that compile is, you know,
any web between, I would
say, you know, best case
250 milliseconds. So it's a
very small percent, you know,
it's not a large percentage
of two seconds, but it
can, you know, if it's,
if there's a lot going
on in the process, it
can, it can go up
into like the one, 1.5
second range. Okay. So we
definitely don't think that it's
a problem to install this
on your regular machine and
you can keep it running
and forget about it. I
know that I installed it
a while back and I
honestly haven't thought about it
since I assume it's doing
its job. Yes, yes. And
I do have to say,
or internal builds is we're
developing video studio, how to
own by default as well.
We've been running that for
like a year plus. And
you know, at first we
will be, we got a
little, little bit of noise
because we used to show
a toast. The said, Oh,
there's she is coming on
responsive. We're collecting information. And
people were blaming the delay,
the actual whole delay, the
two second part, which we
weren't part of on the
toast. They're kind of like,
it's kind of like, you
know, you ask the child,
why do, well, you know,
why, what, what makes wins,
you know, say, Hey, it's
really windy. And people are,
Oh, the kids were like,
Oh, it's cause the trees
are moving. They make the
wind. There's kind of that
effect. Right. But it's not
actually, we were just showing
a real quick toast out
processing. We're collecting this information.
So as soon as we
took away that toast and
people didn't associate the toast
with the delay, you know,
haven't received any. Okay. That's
cool. So I've got this
installed. You said all internal
builds. There's a whole lot
of these out in the
world. Now, I guess we
can go up and look
at the downloads on, on
gallery to get an idea
of how many of these
are, they're all talking back
to you. I assume if
this happens on an airplane,
you'll queue it up and
send it to me later
or send it to yourself
later. Yes. With the external
version, what we do is
we queue them all up
from a particular session. Then
the next time you start,
there's a sheet of, we're
going to show a prompt
saying, Hey, do you want
to go and upload this
information? Okay. Is it, is
this a lot of data?
It depends on the length
of your session. Right? So
each dump file usually weighs
in between, I'd say 500
K to two mega depends.
You know, how many treads
running and what they're doing
and you know, a course
of a session. I probably
think about it. You get
20, 10 to 20 delays.
And then so, you know,
quick math that probably, you
know, 10 megabytes of data
and then you hit, okay,
then we'll just go and
upload that on the background.
I think we use any
windows error reporting, which uses
like background transfer, like bits
and stuff. So you know,
the bit service. So it
doesn't interfere with your regular
browsing. So it kind of
uploads on a very low
priority in the background. This
episode of Hansel minutes is
brought to you by careers.
2.0 careers, 2.0 is a
new service by our friends
at stack overflow. You're probably
all familiar with stack overflow,
the online, a resource dedicated
specifically to programmers and programming
related topics. Well, the team
at stack overflow created careers
2.0 to provide you with
access to great jobs and
introduce you to a bunch
of great companies that you
might consider working for, even
if you're not currently looking
for a job, think of
careers. 2.0 is a programmer
profile gives you a platform
to show that you're awesome
by featuring your proudest contributions
to stack overflow, GitHub SourceForge
Bitbucket, anything programming related, you
can even add your favorite
programming books from amazon.com profiles
on careers. 2.0 are free.
They're easy to get started,
especially by importing your LinkedIn
profile. However, there's one catch
profiles and career 2.0 or
invite only they did this
to keep out the spam
and have a high quality
environment. Fortunately, for you as
a Hansel minutes listener, I've
got your back head on
over to careers dot stack
overflow.com/h M to accept your
invitation today, once again, that's
careers dot stack, overflow.com/hm. I
hope you like it. So
definitely if you're, you know,
if you're in Uganda and
on a three G modem
be aware that perf Watson
might not be for you,
or you might want to
turn it off, but you
know, 10 megabytes here and
there. If you have the
bandwidth, it sounds like it's
valuable. Yeah. Sometimes, sometimes people,
you know, when you install
a Microsoft, they pop up
a dialog box that says,
do you want to participate
in, you know, sending us
all this information? Do you
want to be a member
of our, you know, advisory
council or whatever crazy language
they put in there to
say, I want to send
info. And we always wonder
like, where is this going?
And what are you doing
with that? And why do
I want to help you?
Because you're the one that's
making me slow. So I've
seen people say no, just
to be, just to be
vindictive. And we, we just,
I think we just assume
that the data just goes
nowhere and it's just sitting
in a giant database somewhere.
What does it look like?
Is there a big, is
this an Azure or is
this a giant farm somewhere?
And what are you doing
with all this? Right. So
in the case of perf
Watson, we have this big
old SQL server, you know,
it's 64 cause 128 gig
of Ram kind of crazy
machine. And what we do
with those, some files, we
can relocate the UI thread
within the dump file. Then
we resolve the symbols, which
allow us to get, you
know, the full method, name,
and module. And maybe even
the line numbers has been
cold. So we extract all
that information out like 24,
seven. It's just any dumb
file that comes in. We
extract it out. And then
we go and take, take
that cool stack and insert
it into a, into a,
into a database. So we've
got tons and tons of
calls, facts, all in this
big database, we do some
smart things like we hash
call stacks. So we don't
insert duplets and associate a
certain hit. We call it
a hit is our internal
nomenclature for it. So it
is associated with a cool
stack. And then once we
have this big database of
hits and calls backs, we
then we do aggregations and
we create cool, a cool
tree of all cool stacks,
maybe within an all data,
all within a particular build.
So in the case of
the developer preview release, we're
looking at that right now.
And what we'll do is
we'll say, take all this
data and put it into
a call tree. So how
that works is each call
stack is slightly different, but
a lot of them are
the same. Imagine at the
beginning you get like thread
start and then vs main
and then are all I'm
in the message loop. And
then it goes off and
does different things. So this
kind of aggregation or call
tree, or we also call
it a roll up, basically
shows you the, the, the
splits in execution and how
many people experiences lay down
that certain path. So we
get this overall big feeling
about, Oh, here, here's the
heavy path. You know, we
saw 2000 people how they'd
lay down this path, then
what we can do on,
we have this website we
use internally, which is a
silver light web app and
allows you to query into
this data. So imagine you've
got this roll up and
you're like, Oh, I see
an interesting frame. Maybe it's
something like solution open. You
can say, show me just
the data where people are,
you know, all the quarterbacks
that have solution open in
them. And then we'll get
a roll up of, you
know, just that portion. But
why we do that is
because if we can get
more depth because we cut
off, I think it's not
point not 5% inclusive. So
which is basically life and
less than not, nor 5%
of users as late. We
don't show it in the
tree. So not point not
five is 0.05%. Is that
correct? That's right. Okay. So
you're saying a very, very
small amount. Yes. Well, it
depends on the size of
the data set as well.
Right? It's kind of, it
doesn't mean that they're not
going to be ignored. It
just means that, Hey, we've
got so much data. We
really just don't want to
pay the cost of canceling
that entire tree and storing
it. So you, you split
it off safest solution open.
And then what you do
is you go through that
and we have like a
hot path feature, which shows
you where the majority of
the cost is. And then
you may go and associate
that with a bug in
our bug tracking system. And
then we track that delay
to that bug, and then
we push that to be
fixed. Interesting. Okay. So this
is, this is this isn't
complicated. It seems like, it
seems like Microsoft has moved
towards this, this telemetry thing.
And you know, maybe it's
always been a Microsoft thing.
Or maybe to me, it
feels like somewhere around windows
seven, this culture of intense
analysis. Like if you look
at the building windows eight
blog, you know, they'll, they'll
throw these numbers out very
casually and they'll, they'll say
something like, and I'm making
this up, they'll say like,
you know, only 13% of
people click on the start
menu on a Tuesday. And
that made us design the
system in this way, that
the da, and I'm thinking
to myself, you know, wow,
is that all the data
that, that's what the got
from my anonymous data. And
now you've got this giant
SQL server that's showing like
how I'm moving around in
visual studio and telling me
stuff like, you know, I
assume that you also know
whether I use a hot
key or not, and maybe
the hot key, it was
the slow path versus using
the UI, right. Click menus
and stuff like that. Yes.
Is it, is this just
something you wander around in,
or is there an automated,
like email that goes out
that says, here's the 10
hot things that happened this
week? You know, 5,000 people
hit this this week. It's
not fully automated. We definitely
like to get there, but
I'm personally a big believer
in like human analysis. You
know, we had a choice
when we were developing this,
like, could we go and
make something that's fully automated?
They're gonna tell us automatically
what's wrong. But it turns
out it was pretty hard
to do. And a human
could usually do it in
the space of an hour.
So once we split off
the issues into the, we
call them queries within our
system. So when I talked
about splitting solution, open that
kind of thing, when, when
we split these off into
separate queries, then at that
point we've associated bug with
them, then we track them.
So we can say, we
started off with, you know,
a thousand people hitting this.
And now we can see
that this is growing over
time, or this is a
persistent issue and things like
that, but we, it's definitely
not automated. We do have
reporting that goes out that
says, Hey, these are the
top 20 issues in, in
a release. But you know,
that starts with human analysis
at the beginning. And, and
do those, those top issues.
Like they get like visibility,
like bosses are like looking
at that and they're like,
Oh, I'm on fail. What
the hell is going on
with? Yup, definitely. I definitely
loved the most. And what's
going on with this happened.
There's not a bug associated
with this new trends and
things like that. Yeah. It
goes out. We have in
certainly up performance champs, alias,
which is, you know, top
people working on performance for
each of the teams within
visual studio and the report
goes to there. And then,
you know, it also goes
up to leadership as well.
So it does definitely has
great, great visibility. So I
don't know if it's cool
that you, that you've snuck
on my show and I,
I appreciate that. I'm being
able to ask you all
sorts of questions. I think
it's cool that the teams
that I like, I know
that my team is cool
with telling stuff out, you
know, very transparently. And I
think it's really cool that
you were doing that as
well. So let me push
your good nature a little
farther and say, tell me
some really good bug, give
me an example where you
put perf Watts and on,
and within the first couple
of months you discovered something
and no one thought it
would have been slow. And
it turns out that, you
know, everyone was catching this
issue and it was sending
us to Cleveland. Oh yeah,
no problem. This is actually
a very strange one. It
turned out to be something
from windows. So when we
process messages, when there's no
messages to be processed there,
input, we enter a thing
called idle, which is basically,
do you, I tried this
doing nothing and you can
schedule work here, right? So
you can say, when you
reach idle, this is kind
of like if you're using
dove DPF and you say
a dispatcher begin invoke, and
you say, you know, privacy
application idol, that means, Hey,
there's no input. Go and
do something on the UI
thread. You know, we go
off and do idle task.
And one of these was
a really innocuous, super innocuous
sleep, sleepy X call to
the offering system with a
time of zero. And you'd
be like, why, why, why
would we do that? What
does that mean? Slow, slow
down a little bit. And
give me a little more
detail. So the system is
no one's doing anything. I
haven't moved my mouse in
a while. And this is
a good time for visual
studio to catch up on
little things that needs to
be doing. Yes, yes, exactly.
And one of those little
things was sleep with zero
time timeout, which I knew
like, well, why would you
want to sleep with a
Xero timeout? Well, this is
a processing APC messages, which
are like another kind of
RPC and other kinds of
scheduled message. And more often
than not actually we, there
only one feature using this
and we took it out,
but we still see delays
in the sleep call. And
we're like, like, well, it's
sleeping for zero. Why on
earth? We drank for two
seconds here. And it turned
out the, the windows, the
windows window manager can actually
take a global lock on,
on, on sleep timers. And
you know, it may be,
Hey, when is going off
and doing something and our
application would hang because of
that. And it was totally
safe to remove the code.
Totally, totally innocuous, you know,
totally Anita code was causing
us to delay on a,
quite a regular cadence. So
let me see if I
understand this because paraphrasing helps
me learn. There was a
way that, that, that a
component in visual studio was
using to communicate with parts
of visual studio. And that
component had been long removed,
but the, but the part
in the, in the message
loop that said check to
see if that component has
anything to say was still
there. And it happened to
use a communication technique that
windows itself used some historical
wind 32 thing. So, you
know, you might have some
bizarre side effect like windows
is looking at your, at
your, your SD card for
pictures and using this communication
technique and visual studio is
in the middle of an
idol loop. So, you know,
a bird flaps, its wings
in Brazil and a hurricane
happens in new Orleans. Exactly,
exactly. I think it was,
you know, we'd never expect
that another one, which was,
you know, when we have
the white cursor that comes
up and says should be
obviously right on the way
we, we never actually say
stop and cursor. What we
do is we say stop
Casa. And the next time
we we've processed all the
input that we automatically reset.
It we'd use a timer
for that. Now it turns
out that another, another thing
which we never saw with
Thomas is that for much,
the same reason as the
sleep example would be killing
that timer. Even if that
timer doesn't exist, which is
totally valid, according to the
documentation where it could also
cause a hang and we
are doing this again in
the idle loop and visual
studio. Oh, so that's actually
a matter of the instructor
there. The documentation indicates the
API would behave this way,
but reality indicates it does
not. Yeah. Yeah. Sometimes it
may, you know, and when
we talked to Ashley, Raymond
chat, and then we're like,
Hey, what's what's going on
with this. She's like, wow.
Looking at the code, that
is a possibility that someone
may have a lock on
one of these things. So
you shouldn't kit. So, you
know, the thing was if
the time is no, don't
try and kill it just
don't do it. And that,
that fixed the issue. So
these issues are things inside
the, the idle loop. How
often does it come up
where, you know, some component
or some, I wouldn't say
third party, but internal third-party
component and visual studio has
a problem. Like I had
a, so a couple of
conversations and well, this guy
I was talking about who
came up with the term,
going to Cleveland and I
was saying, well, my machine's
just not just not locking.
I don't see these these
delays. And he says, well,
I'm doing XAML work. And
I'm using the XAML editor.
And I realized that that
designer, that visual designer isn't
loaded on my machine until
I actually open a file
like that. And that's a
very common thing in visual
studio that DLLs and componentry
won't be opened until I
decide to do that. Like
the solution Explorer or the
data that the data connections
area or the XAML Explorer.
How do you find those?
And then do you have
to call that group and
say, Hey, you know other
guy at Microsoft, you don't
know me, I'm Phil. And
I'm, it turns out you're
really slow. Yes, no, I
do that all the time.
You know, we do have
a template for our bugs
that has guidance and stuff
like that. But yes, we,
yeah, definitely. We can see
stuff like, Hey, you press
the key. And then it
went through into the editor
and we can see what
kind of edits or design
surface that was. And then
that design step is may
go off and, you know,
do some expensive operation. And
one that I can talk
to him maybe is loading,
you know, the parameter and,
and the dot comments for
like quick info when you
hover over something. Okay. So
when you're, when you're, when
you move your mouse over
a, a method and then
the little tool tip pops
up. Exactly. And that comes
from XML documentation. So if
that wasn't ready quite yet,
it's like, well, I better
finish reading this file. And
we would just wait on
file IO. And a lot
of the delays in visual
studio that we've seen in,
I'd say a good 50,
60% and not necessarily poorly
written code. Like, Hey, I'm
doing a four, a four
loop phages. It's, it's blocked
on file IO. And we,
we do a lot of
file IO on the youth
UI thread. A lot of
the fixes for that making
that file out. I lazy
doing on a background thread
and then letting the UI
thread know when it's ready.
So it sounds like a
lot of this is really
being like this. This has
support, like this is being
driven into the product because
a number of people have
said that the developer preview
of visual studio is a
lot faster. Are you going
through, and you're fixing all
these, like the chart of
obvious performance mistakes. I assume
that it's the bar chart
it's going lower, right? Yes,
yes. Now some of them
are easy fixes, easiest fixes.
Don't do it. Right. Don't
do just, do you even
need to do that? There
was one case I can
speak to you with that.
We have disaster recovery management,
like auto recovers name of
the feature, and every five
minutes, it's going to go
in and save off all
your documents so we can
have a backup in case
we crash. Now, that's all
goodness. But in video studio,
2010 basis, we had, you
know, some stability problems. Since
we also put a thing
in there for saving the
saving, saving the active window
pro profile in case you
crash. And that's like where
the positions of your tool
windows are and stuff. And
so every five minutes you'd
be saving the window profile
and, you know, the, the
fix that was just don't
do it. We don't need
to be, we fixed the
stability problems with the window
manager and the shell. And
we saved when we switched
them design to debug. Anyway.
So, you know, that's the
case where we identified that
and push that down. And
yeah, we definitely do have
support now that was an
easy fix, but there are
some fixes that do require
we architecture, especially with some
of these sta threaded things.
But I talk about these
services eight years old plus,
and they're all set up
to, you know, have not
really any concept of locking
cause that sta call is
essentially a big global lock
and that will take probably
investment over multiple releases to
get it to where it
needs to be. We kind
of pick off the, we,
we, we pick the top
ones and go after them
and see what to see
what we can do. But
we've also got to that.
This responsiveness is kind of
like a desk desk from
a thousand paper cuts. There's
lots of little ones, which
are lots of little easy
fixes and it may not
be a huge way on
the graph, but all of
them in combination would be
a good win for us.
That's a really good point.
Do you have like a
final story of like the,
like the worst one that
you've found that required a
rearchitecture and like made people
really make a hard decision
and go, Oh man, that's
going to suck, but if
we do it, you know,
lots and lots of people
are gonna notice that. Yup.
Yeah, no, definitely. There's one
in the developer for you
actually is we moved a
C C-sharp build out a
process. So you could think,
Hey see shots throughout our
process, right? Invokes the C
sharp compiler, but that's all
orchestrated via ms. Build and
Emma's build itself is the
backing store to your project
system. And we were actually
evaluating that in process. So
we had to spin off
a team of about six
people for probably about two
months to go off and
do this work and move
this out of process and
use, use, you know, dot
net remoting to kind of
core to the ask process,
component part, and get all
the bits of information we
need back in process and
looked through any performance issues
that made itself, because we
think, Hey, we move our
processes. It's going to be
better. Right. But we have
to verify that we have
to run it through regression
systems and make sure it's
where it needs to be.
And so we here, we
have to spin off spit
off this team and changed
the way that that was
working, but it's worth it
in the end, because now
when you are building previously,
if you're doing a big
bill, you try and maybe
click around the IDE and
it would just kind of
half respond to you. Cause
we are faking responsiveness kind
of like you can VB
you do like do events.
And we kind of like,
just push the message from
a little bit further forward,
but kind of just doing
random points during the build.
We just moved it from
the, our process. And it
was a big investment, but
it pays off because now
when it's building, you can
click on open menus and
use the object browser. You
can even add a code
if you want it to.
Wow. Okay. So that, Oh
really? I can edit kind
of amazing. I can edit
code now when I'm building
and I been with, You
may get a warning. If
it's already built, then you're
good. It's not going to
give you a warning. Now
in VB BD build works
a little bit differently. We
moved that onto a background
thread and you can't edit
code for VB cause the
way the VB build web,
cause it's actually building all
the time as you're typing
and then the bill process,
essentially a serialization of that
prebuilt stuff in memory to
desk. Right. Right. And that's
something that BP is known
for. Yeah. So this, this,
this means that on a
machine with a lot of
processors, like, like my own
personal machine, I've got one
of the hexachord machines, moving
things out of process. Like
that just makes everything more
efficient. I've got the extra
processes to do that work.
Yep. So this is, this
is a big win. Not
just because it made it
more responsive, but it's also
kind of more future-proofed it
makes visual studio less, a
big monolithic exe with a
bunch of in process stuff
and more, a number of
smaller EFCs that all work
together. Yes. Yes. And I
think that will be a
trend for visual studio moving
forward, or at least I
would hope so. Right. The,
the, the XAML designer in
developed review at least also
runs out process as well.
Cause that needs to load
a bunch of a bunch
of assemblies to do essentially
figure out, you know, reflection
and figure out what kind
of user controls and things
like that. You've got to
give you the Intel sets
of the pole. And so
those are certainly needs to
be loaded and reflected over.
And we were doing previously
doing that in visual. She
does process, we are doing
it in a separate abdomen,
but it was still the
same process. It was still
the same memory. So moving
these, our process also has
a great memory benefit. And
we've seen that with moving
those animals designer. I had
a process. Very cool. Well,
thanks a lot, Phil. I
really appreciate you coming on.
And then give me the
straight story about what's going
on in, in the next
version of his studio. It's
cool. Because sometimes you don't
see all these changes. Well,
actually you never see them.
All right. Unless you're poking
around in process Explorer. No,
one's gonna know a lot
of this stuff is happening,
but that makes me want
to spend a little bit
more time with the developer
preview. I don't know, really
test them side by side
and see if I'm going
to see these performance improvements
as well. And of course
everyone should install perf Watson.
Everyone should definitely Because Phil
is going to be looking
at that data for us.
Yeah. Yes, yes. I have
a little team of people
and we, we look at
that data all the time.
Awesome. Well, thanks so much.
Okay. No problem. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week.